Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore. Our usual co-host, Kyle Helson, has the day off today because, of course, we have a guest in for an interview. So, of course, the usual stuff, subscribe to the podcast, five-star ratings and sharing it. Those are all great. Thank you so much. But really sharing it, we still appreciate that. If you are passing our advice on to people, with or without credit, we understand. If you want to share the podcast up on...
up on a forum or something like that. That is so fantastic. Thank you so much for all of that. And of course, remember that we are ad-free, so if you'd like to donate and support the show that way, empiricalcycling.com slash donate is the way to go. We have some show notes up on the website. We do talk about a couple papers in this one. I will link all of them. And actually, the main one is going to be is actually open text, so you can definitely head in and read that and form your own opinion, as we always encourage.
If you have any coaching or consultation inquiries, of course that is our main business because the podcast is free.
You can reach out empiricalcycling at gmail.com. Of course, we are taking on athletes at all levels. We are negotiable, of course, for students and professional athletes because we know some pros don't make a lot of money. That's cool. We understand. We want to work with you anyway. And of course, if you have any extenuating circumstances, please reach out and we are happy to find you a good coach and a good fit at the right budget for you. And of course, if you just want to reach out once and have a consultation, we can do that too. Our time is your time and we will answer any questions.
We will look at your training. We will give you training advice. We will help you sketch out a season or something like that. We'll talk about periodization, lifting, or whatever you want to discuss with us. We're happy to do that. So thanks so much for all of your inquiries, by the way. And of course, up on Instagram, at Empirical Cycling, of course. We have the Weekend AMAs up in the Instagram stories. And give me a follow there and check out the stories. I've been...
told that they're fantastic because they're really, really short. It's better than Twitter, but not as good as a podcast in terms of duration. So for a lot of people, it's just the right amount in the middle. So thanks everybody for participating in those. Those were a lot of fun for me too.
and now as we get into the interview I want to apologize first for the audio quality again sorry we are working these bugs out so my mic clips a little bit and as a recovering audiophile that really bugs me probably doesn't bug a lot of people so I'm jealous of you for that I was not getting any feedback that I was clipping so on the recording so you know otherwise I would have adjusted my levels obviously and our guest had to had to go find refuge in a cafe and
Of course, that means there's a little bit of background noise. I've gated him, tried to gate the background noise, but of course, it comes in and out. I'll do my best as I can with that. But it's a really good interview, and I thought we had a great conversation, so we're not going to take another crack at it. It is what it is.
Obviously, this is the 2021 Welsh Road Race Champion. He's a coach at Kilowatt Coaching, his own coaching company. We discussed his recently completed education at Loughborough University and some of the research he did on potentially supplementing citrulline. Is there a result? Well, you're going to have to listen to find out.
So of course we also, the main reason that we got together for this podcast is recently a paper on bias and research results came out and he's done stats a lot more recently than I have and so we wanted to discuss that. So we go into that paper quite a bit and we also get into things like lactate and critical power and warming up and all sorts of other usual stuff that coaches have in conversations.
I was caught a little bit on the back foot on some of these topics because I like to do a little bit of research. I'm not so quick on my feet, so that definitely comes through and I apologize for that.
Our guest is really, really smart. He's really cool. We have a really good conversation. The more I talk to him, the more I like him. I think the more everybody hears from him, the more you're going to like him too. Of course, he is a coach, so if you want to reach out to him, you can do so at Kilowatt Coaching up on Instagram. He says that's probably the best way to do it. Of course, you can reach out to him. His name is Marinus Petersen. I'm really looking forward to everybody hearing this conversation. Without further ado, let's get into it, and I'll see you on the other side.
One of the things that I was struck by as we talked is that as we chatted, I felt more like I was talking to a peer, and that's definitely kind of your education coming through, but also I think it was interesting in that there was some questioning of the education because you had said that there's a lot of emphasis on high-intensity training and stuff, where at the same time, in your experiential
I don't know, experience, I guess. Wow. Yeah. So, yes. And so in your experience with training, you find that, you know, violating the principles that you were taught in school actually are somewhat beneficial. And I really appreciate that level of doubt and also just trial and error. So tell me about your education and.
and the strengths of it and what's the emphasis on high-intensity interval training coming out of the best exercise physiology university in the world? Well, first of all, one thing I do, what makes you start doubting it or makes you start questioning things is when you can see you're at the best place in the world. These are all the leading experts.
Work together in the same office and you can still ask them a question about something and they can all give you a different answer. They still don't quite agree. So you could ask them, say, do you think there's anything to sort of training with low glycogen stores? Do you think that can drive adaptation at all? And some, yes, two experts who work in the same lab.
Literally one would say, oh I think there's something in this, fuel for the work required and they're really on to something and then equally my supervisor, he thinks there's nothing in it at all, he thinks it's all a hoax and he thinks it's bullshit and they literally work together on the same projects, publish studies together, done research in training and nutrition so yeah, we sort of realised at some point
You learn all this stuff, but you do have to be critical about it and make your own mind up. And there are some things that people are more agreeing on and some things that still really divide all the top experts in the world. It was really helpful in that. And you do get taught, especially as you go along the course, to be...
Be more critical and to and to every time you look at a paper think like actually you know who was the what was the study design here does that really can you really interpret the results of that and apply it to the population you're looking at and and that's kind of a skill that they they do they do try and encourage and they do teach you but I think perhaps as we'll go into more that that's that's still almost underdone
and there's other aspects to consider when you're looking at scientific research and the limitations of it that isn't quite understood or emphasized enough. Well you said, well let's start on the positive note first before we kind of get into what we had been talking about here. Oh yeah, before we slate it, yeah. What do you find that people actually really agree on? One thing is that
High training volumes, whether you're a rat or mouse running on a hamster wheel or whether you're a world tour cyclist, that high volume of training generally correlates with better endurance performance. I'd say that's one thing that's pretty constant. And then I'd say even that, and then again that for elite performers, most, with the exception of one thing I hope,
I was listening to recently that generally seems to be a consensus that most of your training needs, if you're an elite athlete, needs to be below your first, very easy and below your first threshold. And the last thing I'd say is that, yeah, for high intensity exercise you need carbohydrate. I guess that would be, yeah.
No one really disagrees about that Well you bring up first threshold and in our first attempt at this recording before internet connections took a poo I think you had talked about how it felt like the first, like LT1 was the only real threshold and that LT2 or whatever we want to call it is actually
Highly controversial. And so why don't you tell me a little bit about that and we can try to unpack it because I think this is going to be really, really interesting for people to hear about. Okay, so what we got in one of our lectures, we actually presented with like, this is how sports science does it, which is you have three zones. Your first zone is from rest to your...
First lactate threshold, which is what you should apparently do most of your easy aerobic training in. And then you've got your second threshold, which they call critical power, which is what they use. And then you should do your high intensity intervals above your critical power and you should minimize almost at all costs time spent between your first...
Lactic Threshold and your Critical Power and then they they mapped that against like Andy Coggin zones and I don't even think they did it quite correctly and so they even put all they put like threshold training was all below CP so FTP and everything was below CP and they just and and they almost they were they like they just completely take the piss out of like
Sweet Spot Tempo, they just lump it all into, they just call it, oh it's all tempo or some pointless like rubbish like that and it all just gets kind of like lumped together and then yeah and they talk about how you kind of get magic adaptations that happen above your CP which they are treating as being something very, a very definite point and that there's no point training harder than your
LT1 unless you're going to go above CP because it just induces more fatigue but no more training benefit. And yeah, that's a summary of what that is. Yeah, that's really interesting. Because I think our experience in the real world as cyclists and cycling coaches is actually quite contrary to that.
I think you had said in take one that basically it was something like there are so many definitions. I'm really going to badly paraphrase you now. I'm sorry. There are so many definitions of LT2 that it almost doesn't seem like it's possible to actually measure. Yeah, yeah. Although I did put out a podcast a couple weeks, months ago now. Basically, I basically bashed.
All Lactate Threshold Tests. And that's not to say I was in favor of critical power, but I was just saying that if we look at the power curve, like an athlete's full power curve for, you know, last 365 days usually captures most max values and usually somebody's best performances from last year, which I think is pretty fair to do. We can actually see that threshold that everybody's looking for. Over it, we fatigue faster. Under it, we fatigue slower.
Really, really simple to look at and scope. That's it. And I think when we start to try to make physiological definitions to define that point, we can get lost because there's so much individual variation. Like I found that doing an MLSS test at mine, my lactate accumulation was actually greater than would be allowed in the MLSS.
You know, like stabilization after first 10 minutes plus one millimole. I was actually like 1.6 or 1.8 millimoles after like 30 minutes or something like that. So it didn't capture me because I'm badly aerobically trained. I have no mitochondria, so I cannot oxidize lactate or fat. I have three mitochondria. They're all in my fingers because I type all day. That's it. Yeah. You know?
I think what you're saying though about how your method depends on having a really complete power profile, which is very good with lots of points so you can clearly see where you get that inflection point. I think that's very difficult to do. I think a lot of these sports science studies, they'll be on very recreationally trained people
Even over the course of an intervention, their fitness is probably going to increase or change because just going in and doing each test is going to make their performance change. Knowing where to pinpoint these durations is also going to be difficult because you don't know what would be appropriate length.
of their year because they're what their time to exhaustion would be so it's kind of possible to do in the scenario of like with you and your athletes when you know what durations you need to test them on but in a like like lab setting in their study conditions it's near impossible.
It is, and that's one of the very difficult things about it, is that in the real world, we actually have the luxury of being able to aggregate performances, where in a lab setting, we don't. And I've been part of a cycling research group, and people are asking me, like, what's your protocol for this? And I'm like, I don't have a protocol, because I get to talk to the athlete.
And I get to look at their data, and that means I have, if we're looking for LT1 and LT2, I have very easy ways to go, okay, we're going to test in like 15 watt increments.
More or less, and then we're going to measure lactate, and we're going to also measure RPE, and we're going to measure HRV, and we're going to do all these other things, and then we're going to look at the data afterwards and go, okay, this corroborates, because we have a point to start looking, you know? And so it is very much a luxury that I think in some ways can really stymie the quality of, you know, definitions of threshold in academia, let's say.
Yeah, and I think this would be kind of the turning point for sports science to be researched, to be like more respected by coaches would be if they could start finding better ways of just gathering like race and training data from races and training that people are doing anyway and processing that rather than trying to go along the route of
It's always been that everyone has to go into a lab, everyone has to do exactly the same protocol and that's just not ecological and it's not going to lead to finding the best information really. Yeah, but when it comes to actually having a good study protocol, you want to control as many variables as possible.
you know getting people in the lab having to do the same thing is would really be the gold standard so it's it's a difficult choice to make because if we start taking like like actual performance data from on the road we don't know if somebody's power meters off 1% or 8% and we don't know if that was a max effort or not
You know, we can assume it was probably 95 to 99 percent of a max effort like in a race, but there's fatigue to contend with, like, you know, who knows? So I think I think it's a difficult spot to be in. And actually, that reminds me, I wanted to ask you, did you see the paper factor artifact? So like 50 years of controversy on critical power or something like that?
No, I'm not familiar with that actually. Oh man, I should have sent that to you instead of the one that we're going to talk about. So yeah, it sounds much more interesting. It's funny because what they do is they basically look at what they start taking, you know, like they take a bunch of performances and take like three minutes, like 12, 15, 20, 60, 90, two hours, five hours, et cetera, et cetera. And they look at what's the critical power.
when we put in all of these data points and they found that as the longest duration of the critical power calculation goes longer, they actually are finding that critical power is always like 95 to 99 percent of their longest calculated value. Right, so it just gets lower than on the...
Extend the test durations out to. Yeah, and the response to it was interesting too, because they were like, well, 3 in 12 or 3 in 15 minutes is pretty much the gold standard these days. Yeah, yeah. And even though in the original Minot paper, they had said that...
I think he recommended that the minimum long duration was like 20 minutes or something like that. Yeah, yeah. Whereas they say that's the maximum pretty much. Yeah, it's always 3 and 12 is the classic thing with critical power tests. Yeah. Well, and I think it's funny too because this might be interesting to hear your opinion on is because Kyle and I had actually recorded a podcast on that paper and then we scrapped it because it wasn't.
very well organized because I didn't do enough prep for it. It was a 10-minute tips and it should have been a Wattstock because Wattstock I'll do like eight hours of prep for an episode where 10-minute tips I literally do 10 minutes. But one of the things I came up with an example of an athlete I have who I've been coaching since like, you know, November, December, something like that. And I did a critical power calculation with him, which last year, 2020, 2021,
came out to about 403 watts or something like that. And his FTP was like 360, 370. This year, his FTP is actually 400 watts. And so it was an interesting, and his critical power calculated this year is the same. Yeah.
And so I thought it was a really interesting example of the performance coming up to meet the calculation, but that's not going to be the case with everybody. And ironically, it's because he's done a lot of middle intensity training. Yeah, yeah, that all makes perfect sense to me. And perhaps even you could use critical, start to see and use critical power as something like VO2max, where it's like it represents the ceiling of how good you could be.
Whereas your FTP is more like this is what you can actually do in the real world and that's why it's functional. That would be actually a really interesting idea. Yeah. Well, now that I've got some WorldTour data, I can do that calculation and see if anybody violates or exceeds that. Although I doubt it, but maybe some folks can, sure.
But actually this kind of gets into statistics because I think because this kind of will work into the paper that we're going to talk about initially is whenever I see people doing like correlation studies on whether this threshold matches with this threshold and stuff like that like MLSS with critical power or LT2 with the DMAX method or whatever it is. Yeah, I usually see things like bland Altman plots and you know, they're looking for
I'm not entirely sure, though, because my stats are really rusty. Last time I took stats was like 2012 or something like that.
I've done it slightly more recently. Yes, you have, which is why I think it would be interesting if you wanted to comment on kind of those correlational studies on finding that these things are at least statistically not significantly different. Yeah, so I mean, this paper that we were looking at here is quite, yeah, quite shocking really. It just shows how
How bad of an issue it is in research that you've got way more results that are only just statistically significant. So if everything was in an ideal world, it would follow a normal distribution. But what you can see that it actually happens is you've got a massive spike.
of values that of like studies that are coming out was just like only just statistically significant on either side of the distribution and then almost nothing coming out as as like you know just proving the null hypothesis although when I thought about this more and I thought there is kind of an argument for why that might actually be the case and it would be that like what you wouldn't design a study
If you didn't think like that that nothing was going on like you wouldn't be like I'm gonna design a study to show that there is no correlation or like between people's favorite color and their gender because there's there isn't anything going on so it makes some sense that that you see that and and I guess what aligns with that is that the value the like
What's the word? The problem in medicine was very similar. The occurrence of this problem was very similar in medicine to what it is in sports medicine. If it is a problem, it's not unique to sports science.
Oh, definitely, yeah. Well, because the paper is, let me check my notes here real quick. It is, where did I write down the title? I swear I did. Oh, the bias for statistical significance in sport and exercise medicine. And I think, and I read the paper, and one of the things that I thought was interesting is that they note registered papers, I think is what they called it. So I think, I didn't look this up, because it is.
Basically what they talked about, I kind of got the picture of like, they register a method, a methodology, then they carry it out and they report it regardless of what result they get and it seems that... Registered reports, wasn't it? That's what they call it. Oh yeah, that's it. It seems like the actual non-significant results they get are much more common.
when they actually do papers like that. It gave the example of when they've done it in psychology, they got half as many positive results where a positive result would mean that there was something going on. And they said that since they've been doing that in sports science, they've suddenly got, or sports medicine, they've suddenly just got a lot less papers being published. So, and I think, but I think that's a good
I think that there's just loads of papers being published that aren't like scientifically rigorous it just just making everything more confusing for anyone everyone but then at the same time you want to encourage more research to being done and it's similar to how like a lot of like a lot of there are a lot of like smaller universities from around the world who who are trying to publish research
And we want to encourage that so that they can break their way in, if you like, and their research can be published. But on the other hand, you want to be able to distinguish between less rigorous research and more rigorously controlled research that we're getting from universities like Loughborough. And just a really weird, crazy idea I had was
If you could allow these sort of studies to be published, but almost have like, I don't know if you have this in the US, but in the UK we have like food hygiene stickers in front of restaurants. So you can have like, it'll say like, this is zero to five food hygiene. And so like, a five is like, this place is really good. But anything like above a two is safe to be open. So you could have like, oh this from Mumbai University, this study on...
Critical Power is a three out of five. So like food hygiene. So you can look at it, but just be aware that it might not be perfect. It might happen to be perfectly good, but then it's not necessarily gold standard research. Interesting, because I think something like that has potential for fuckery.
for lack of a better term. It's sort of like it has issues, like peer review has issues too. It's like, how many memes have we seen on Twitter and Instagram about reviewer three? And I think, you know, so I think
I think at some level that could potentially be really good, but I think at some level that could potentially be really terrible, especially if whoever is signing, because you're not going to have amazing criteria that is able to really capture everything, I think, for study quality, because I could think of a couple studies that I bet would get a four or five rating.
that I would think actually deserve like a two. Well, this is where I think you'd have to have, you know, a centralized like governing body almost. And the conditions are laid out and like this is how it's done. Yeah, it's flawless with the UCI and the IOC, isn't it? Yeah, yeah, exactly. That proves how it can never be perfect.
Yeah, you always have to make up your own mind, ultimately. Yeah, but I think, why don't we start with, why don't you describe that abnormal distribution from the paper? I think, I believe it was figure three, my work laptop's closed right now, but it's the one that has the, it's like got the two camel's humps in it. Yeah, so...
If any of you listening know what a normal distribution looks like, it's sort of like, it's a bell-shaped curve. And so what is class is statistically significant when you put in your Z values into this distribution. And a Z value is like a way of kind of making what you've got fit onto this distribution.
It could be making all means fit onto one distribution, to scale it to that. If it is normally distributed, on average, they should all come out in this bell-shaped curve.
Why don't we describe what the bell-shaped curve would look like or what it would signify before we describe this one. I'm going to put this one up in the show notes. I'll screen grab it and put it up there. Because in the middle of the distribution would be all of our null values. We don't find a statistically significant difference and so therefore we cannot reject our null hypothesis. Is that right?
Yeah, so that should happen most of the time, because most of the time there is nothing going on. And then it should only be in 5% of cases where things fall outside the main bit of that Bell distribution that's in the middle.
Yeah, so that's what should be the case. Right, and so what we have in this is it looks like we scooped out the middle. It literally looks like we took a hillside and we blasted out the middle to put a highway through it. Yeah, and then right at the edges where it should just be really thin little tails, we've just got spikes that are spiking really high suspiciously just outside of the arbitrary threshold, which has been...
drawn, which also happens to determine whether your study is going to get published or not, which seems very, very, very suspicious. Yeah. Yeah. So kind of what the paper talked about here is that they, I think, I think primarily most people are going to jump to this is probably, you know, people don't want to submit publishing insignificant results. You want to look like you found something always.
and that publications don't really want to submit insignificant results because who's going to reference an insignificant result? Very few people, right? Yeah, although I mean, I'd say there are situations where it can actually, like, it is useful. Like, for example, in my finally a project that I did, it was on whether...
using L-citrulline can improve your absorption of carbohydrate, increase the oxidation and then consequently improve preloaded time trial performance and we found that it did absolutely nothing and I don't think that's a useful result, a useless result. I think that is a useful result because you can then discard it. You can think actually we won't pursue this any further. So I mean I think
Just looking for things, always finding things that say, this does work, this does do something. Sometimes it's a useful result to rule something out, but it's just not as exciting. Yeah, no, I agree. And actually, speaking of L-citrulline, the first study I ever really read about citrulline experiments was in Hans Krebs' discovery of the urea cycle.
Okay. And so I think there's been such a big shift from experiments done then to experiments done now, especially the way that the papers are written. Because I think at least in the biochem stuff, which is primarily what I read, well, especially from that era.
They do a lot of experiments, and they'll actually put in a lot of the null result experiments, but it's easy for them because they're just like...
Oh, we're going to take this tissue of kidney slice and we're going to add this, this, and this. We're going to see if it evolves CO2 and consumes oxygen or whatever. And metabolic blah, blah, blah yields this and therefore we try to find this. And it's not so easy anymore, especially when we're talking about things that are not a small enclosed cycle like the urea cycle.
You know, we're looking at a high level at whole body athlete performance. And so that adds an additional piece of difficulty because we could, we could put, you know, we could do that experiment again with like, you know, 25 amino acids or something like that or more at amino acid derivatives, you know? Yeah. Whereas in, and you can just, yeah, do that quite quickly in contrast, like with a sports science study like this, each, each person who is only one point.
has to go to the lab at least four times to compare two things and each one of those sessions takes the researcher a whole day. So how much time and money is invested to get a null result? People don't want to do that. So it is an issue. And I have one more question on this, which is I think...
I think people who are in academia to some level or to pay attention to it are aware of p-hacking and so do you think that this counts as some evidence of p-hacking? I mean I think probably it is happening in some cases but like not necessarily and like what I thought one interesting thing they said in the study was that it doesn't even
It's not even necessarily conscious the way that the bias occurs. You might even just mean that you keep on doing more measurements because you think, oh, that doesn't quite look right. And you just carry on recruiting the study longer or redoing things. It's not necessarily even...
Even conscious. It's hard to tell because there's so many variables involved. Well, I think they also mention small test groups and statistical power. You really don't have much until you start getting groups of like 30 or more. And that's just your experimental...
Yeah, yeah, this is exactly it. Like, if you can get 10...
20 people to do a study, that's pretty good. So to get 60 is some heard of. What else about this paper jumped out at you? Anything make you scratch your head? I mean, the most shocking of all the graphs, definitely that bigger three, but...
What I also thought was, yeah, a little strange is how the peak is a lot higher for the Z values above 1.96 than it is below minus 1.96. And I don't know if you've got any better ideas, but I'm trying to think why that might be and why that, because it's also different and the other way around from what you see in medicine, in sports medicine.
I wonder if you've got any ideas why that might be, because it's quite a significant difference, quite a big difference, yeah. I have absolutely no idea. I mean, the only thing that I thought is that, my only thought about that is, like, if we're looking at, like, a P less than 0.05, which is, like, basically there's less than 5% chance that this happened to a random chance.
But if we have so many studies where we get a P of 0.04 or something like that, or 0.049 or whatever it is, how many of those, like if we just take 1 20th of those, which 1 20th of those actually have that T-test by random chance, like where they find an effect? That's where my brain goes.
Yeah, so wondering how many of them are genuine and how many of them are kind of magic smoothed over that line. Yeah, I would also want to look at how many of these had untrained subjects or moderately trained or recreationally trained. And I think also I kind of want to ask you about something else too, which is what about studies on highly trained?
Individuals, because I know I'm sure you've read as many of these as I have, actually probably more. And so what what in those protocols stands out to you? Because a lot of these are actually in favor of high intensity interval training. So what do you think about the methods there? Well, I'd say first of all, it's defining like highly trained or elite is just like.
You decide. How do you want to do it? I've heard it defined so many different ways. Sometimes people say it's VO2 max over 60. Some people say it's over 55. Over 70. Over 70. Or sometimes even you have to have represented your country at international level. And then even that's a bit thin ice because sometimes it could be the Djibouti bobsleigh team.
what the study is done on or sometimes it could literally be on US Olympic team and so there's I don't even like you have to almost you pick your definition of highly trained or elite depending on exactly what you're interested in and so like if you want you have to just be that specific I want I want to know what this what is the case in world tour cyclists and then do a study on world tour cyclists and I don't think you can
Yeah, I remember reading a breakdown many years ago of a study that looked at, I think it was altitude, a particular altitude intervention or something like that
For a lot of people, their performance level went down and there was one person where it shot up. And I remember the person breaking it down saying, you need to find out if the person you're training is the one whose performance improves by this. But then I was also thinking, what if there's something else there?
where this person's performance would have been different if we knew XYZ about their off-bike kind of stuff. There are so many things to consider here. And also the motivation of the people in the study can also be a big factor too. If something's too exhausted, how do you tell when somebody's exhausted? Is it their pedal revs drop below 50 RPM because they can't pedal anything? Is this okay? Is this right? I don't know.
One thing you just made me think of is because this L-citrulline study that I did, because I always used to, I quite like the, I don't know if you've ever had the beetroot shots and buying it thinking I'd get a bit of a boost out of that and then after doing my study and my supervisor teaching me that it kind of works in a similar mechanism to like nitrate supplementation L-citrulline could work on a
similar mechanism. I looked more into the literature around nitrate supplementation on improving performance, specifically in that they said that generally it doesn't work for more well-trained people. But some people do respond particularly well amongst elite athletes. So when I looked into this one study,
The high responders were the people who actually had the lowest training volume. And so that perhaps what's actually going on is that training makes you produce more nitric oxide and have higher resting levels. So the reason these people that responded better was actually because they just hadn't done enough training to optimize their levels.
So that actually it is more, when you say it's about training status, it literally is about training status as in how much training you've done. Whereas these two individuals have been classed as elite because their genetics meant that they could reach 70 VO2 max without actually doing that much training because there are people like that who can, yeah, their resting levels are just very high.
That just made me think of that. Yeah, that's interesting. Well, actually, I remember one of my athletes was getting piss tested, and I remember afterwards she remarked that the doping control person was like, oh, you're not on Beaver Juice. Like, she was the only person who was using one color. Yeah, yeah. Wow, that's amazing. Yeah, I thought that was really interesting, because, I mean, on some level, like, it's not going to, like, harm your performance.
No. It's just going to make you think that you're bleeding out of your urethra the first time, but then you go, oh, that's just that beat color. Yeah, we know. Yeah, yeah. I think that's interesting, though. But, you know, I think one of the interesting things about just training volume in general is that one of the adaptations that is expected that I think
We typically see in a lot of studies that are done when people are coming off of their offseason because they want a good baseline for everybody. It's like one of those HIT studies, like the intermittent efforts versus the steady efforts.
Typically people are coming off of their off season or they've just done a couple weeks of easy riding before they start doing the intervention and then it's like what increases VO2 max more? The answer is anything at that point. Absolutely anything, yeah. Because I want to see what happens if we take somebody who's like really fit and then we give them a protocol, see if we can get them even more fit. That's what I want to see, you know. Yeah. And that's what everyone wants to know, but in that case.
It's almost the opposite problem that whatever you give them, you're never going to get that much of a change. And there's going to be so much noise in the data that maybe the intervention that worked better didn't get the better result because actually their coffee was a bit weaker the day before they did their performance test. You just can't, yeah. And I think that's actually...
Something to think about too is in the interpretation of all this science. What's the target audience? Because I just Googled HIT training and benefits or something like that. And there's like Vox articles. The title is obviously clickbait shit, but how to get the most out of your exercise time according to science. And then there's something from the Harvard School of Public Health on high-intensity interval training.
Fat loss in mice or something. Yeah, increase strength and endurance, improve health outcomes, but it's not necessarily better than other exercise formats, et cetera, et cetera. Well, it's nice they have that little bit in there about, but that's the Harvard School of Public Health. It's not Vox where...
you know it's a little more egregious of like we found the silver bullet to health and exercise and fitness and so when it comes to the target audience you know do you think that some researchers have just general health of you know average the average person in mind and it gets misinterpreted by people who want to
improve high performance athletes or do you think that these things don't usually get too confused? I think they definitely do by less well-read coaches. Not to name names. Not to name names, yeah. But then at the same time there definitely is a certain amount of crossover.
Because I mean as you know from like biology you know in a sense everyone's made of the same chemistry to some extent and I mean like I just I think it's quite interesting what Inigo San Milan says that you know he works on everything from cancer patients to someone who's won the Tour de France twice and he said in a way to him it's
It's physiology either way, but obviously you're dealing with very different beasts there. So there's definitely some stuff that can cross over, but you've just got to appreciate that you're dealing with very different creatures. I think his approach is really interesting because he's saying, can we use some of the best endurance performances in the world, people with, you know,
Humongous mitochondrial density and oxidative potential and, you know, VO2 max and all that kind of stuff. Can we use them to fight cancer? Yeah. The answer is going to be maybe, obviously. It needs some research about us being done. But, you know, I think at some level, one of the things that's going to be missing is just genetics.
I'm astounded by the level of physiological response by some people on the training that they're doing because there are people doing more training who are
who are not as good, really. And I'm looking at these going, this is pure genetics. It's not the fact that this training is better or worse, it's just that they respond so much faster and so much better to the same training that I might see from a local cat too. Yeah. Yeah, that's... I mean...
I think there's so many variables with elite performance that it's hard to see what's actually going on. But on the other hand, I think elite performance is kind of a good scientific experiment in a way to inform what to do for general population health. And the way I think of it is, like Formula One,
Pushing the boundaries of that, you then realize how to make things as good as they possibly can be. And then that technology can kind of trickle down into making your everyday cars more aerodynamic so that you're also saving more fuel going at 70 miles an hour on a motorway. Yeah, my car has a dual clutch and that comes as direct trickle down from motorsport. Yeah. Yeah. So, I mean, I think there's potential.
Yeah, so I think this kind of gets to, you know, what do you think is the balance? I mean, maybe there's no answer to this, actually, there's definitely no answer to this, but I'm going to ask you anyway. It depends. What is the balance between peer-reviewed literature and real-world experience, especially for cyclists?
I think taking in as much of the peer-reviewed literature you can is always a good starting point because if you've got certain goals and you don't want to waste too much time trying every different training method that you possibly can and to only find the thing that works for you when you're 70.
and I finally found my optimal training and I can maybe win the VET 75s in a few years. You want to try and make the best, most educated guess you can as soon as you can. But then equally, if you start something and it's not working, and it's clearly not working for you, but it's what the science says should be working, it doesn't really matter. And if you can find something, you still shouldn't be doing it.
And if you can find something, say, like tempo work that a lot of literature might say really shouldn't work for you, but you actually find, oh, I'm getting 1% stronger every week or 10% stronger every month or whatever it is, then if it works, it works. So do it. Like, you don't have to, like, if you see those puddles, you know that it's rained sort of thing. You don't have to.
You don't have to collect it in a bucket. Well, maybe in the UK we know it's rained. Also, the tour might have come through if there's puddles. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, that's true. I had two questions to ask, which one I want to ask you first. Why don't we start with, why don't you talk about your own experience with training?
because in our first call I think you had you had a really interesting take on this because you I think you had said you would be doing a lot of high intensity stuff a lot of very very polarized stuff and then you started doing some threshold work and you felt like you were getting faster. Did I remember that correctly? Yeah, that's pretty much it. So I like with with what I've been taught and like all my all the
People, my lecturers and kind of what we taught at Loughborough was that everything has to be, your training has to be really highly polarized and that your endurance rides even have to be quite a lot below LT1 and your high intensity intervals have to be
Like maximum eight minutes. That's like a magic number. It can't be longer than eight minutes. Because of that Siler study showing that eight minutes had the best outcome or something like that, right? Yeah, exactly. But when I started just doing super adventurous, some 20-minute efforts and some 20-minute over-unders, whereas I found that perhaps I did improve for a while doing...
The really polarised training, it kind of came to a point where either seeing no improvement or seeing quite slow improvements. And I just sort of got used to that. I thought, you know, this is kind of the level I'm at. But then when I do find when I do the longer efforts, like every time I go back and do them session by session, I'm seeing improvements. And so clearly that is something that does work for me.
But then on the other hand, would it work if that's what I'd done from the start and if that's all I ever did? And how much longer would I continue to improve by doing that kind of training? I'm not sure. Yeah, no, I think that's really interesting because in my coaching experience now, what I find is pretty much what Dean Golich said a long time ago because I had suspicions then. He was like, oh, no, no, this is it.
No, there's no one intervention that's going to lead to your best cycling performance because I think it's interesting. Cycling itself is interesting in that we need such a wide spread of ability to win a bike race. And so, you know, we're looking at somebody's natural sprint ability, their anaerobic capacity and muscle mass and things like that, RFD. Then we're also looking at VO2 max and then we're looking at efficiency, capillary density, fiber type, metabolic capacity, all that kind of stuff.
So we're really looking at a giant spread of abilities and what Dean had said was that there's no one training type It's endurance or via 2 max or threshold, whatever it is, that's going to get you to your best performances that you have to do everything And the longer I do this, the more that that's true, you know? Yeah And what's also really hard to do
Bike Racing more so than athletics or road running triathlon is that it's really hard to know like what are you even trying to achieve with your training because it's like what's actually going to make me like more likely to win that race and then what's even going to make you more likely to win that race is going to even depend on what the weather's like on the day of your goal race or how your goal race pans out. You know you could like
You could do a lot of work on your critical power, sorry, threshold, whatever it is. We all know the same thing, yeah. We know the same thing. And you could get that really good thinking that was going to be the critical determinant of your goal race. And then actually when it comes to your goal race, the wind's blowing really strong, it ends up being really cagey, and it comes down to like a burn-up like in the last kilometre. And actually...
You would have spent your time much better just really hammering your anaerobic capacity, and that would have made more of a difference to your race result. Or then, yeah, I mean, it's just like, it's complete chaos a bike race, isn't it? There's aerodynamics, there's weather, there's the tactics, there's nutrition, and I think you get a lot of people thinking like,
All that really matters is your tactics and all that really matters is how aero you are or how light you are or what your threshold are and they're all wrong because it is everything and it's just thrown into this like bundle and you have no idea. Yeah, they're all wrong because they're all right. Yeah, yeah, exactly. Yeah. Well, I think so. One more question for now at least is
What do you see as happening in coaching that coaches could learn from science? Because the thing I've got penciled in here is, because we just talked about training interventions, like, you know, what do you feel like works for you? Kind of doing a bit of everything or kind of doing whatever. But, and you know, you had said that, you know, if there's a puddle on the ground, you know it's rained.
There's a peeve as less than 0.05 that it's rained, I guess. Yeah. And so what about like, you know, pre and post testing interventions? Because I think a lot of the stuff that I see in coaching and like popular intervals as they come and go over time, a lot of it's based on theory. But
I don't see enough people actually doing a post-test to see, did this work? Because a lot of the time when it comes to things like, oh, we want to shift fiber type to type 1, we have no way to test that. Like, kind of, we have no way to test that. I'm sure we could come up with a couple. Well, muscle biopsy can get done, but if you want one done, yeah.
Loughborough is the place to get them done, but yeah, quite difficult and very invasive and expensive. So what are your thoughts on, for people who are coaches or people who are coaching themselves, which is probably the majority of people listening to this podcast, what do you think people should think about doing with trying to figure out if their training intervention actually works?
Well, I think one thing you can learn from science in that kind of lab-based approach is just, like, if you are, say, looking to test, you know, routinely test what your VO2max is or your FTP, that if you can control as many variables as possible around that test, because if, you know, one time you do your FTP test, like,
on a turbo without a fan and maybe not hydrated properly and the next time you do it and you've got a mate racing you up a climb, of course you're going to do 30 watts more, but does that mean your training has worked or does that mean it's just because you did it out on a climb and you had the motivation of your mate pushing you on? I think if you are going to test
Decide how you're going to do it and just keep as many variables controlled so then you can reduce the noise to actually find out if something has changed then it's just this training intervention or equally yeah like when looking at your training as your training volume also changed or is literally all you've changed this one type of
You've Been Doing But Of Course It's So Hard In Real Life Because When Are You Ever Going To Have Two Whole Month Or Six Week Or Two Month Period Where Everything Is Going To Be Controlled Between Between Both Of Them And Equally Like That's Not Even Really The Case Because If You Do The Second One You're Building On That
Foundation of Fitness that you've done in the previous one. So you could almost only do it like this year I'm going to try after my base season doing threshold work and next year I'm going to try doing VO2max work after my base season. But even then you've got the previous year of foundation so control as many variables as you can but then also appreciate the variables that you haven't been able to control and how that might influence things.
What I typically see with people, and this is one of the things that a lot of people ask me about, is they usually find that they get to a plateau. Whether it's the training plan that they're using, or whether it's a particular training philosophy that they have, there's something there that they have on good advice and good foundational principles.
But at some level, you know, it's almost like the theory supersedes the realized results, if that makes any sense. Like, they'll keep doing something that seems to be not working, despite the fact that, like, theoretical it should, but in reality it's not. So I think a lot of people have a hard time, like, breaking out of that rut and having a good pre-test, post-test routine might help quite a bit.
Yeah, yeah, definitely. Yeah, just keeping, and I mean, there's, of course, the testing, as I've heard you speak about before, there's a lot, people can get very nervous, and there's a big psychological component, and people can start to think, maybe this is all I can ever, I can only ever do, this power, you know, my threshold can never get higher, and methods, like you say, of going off field, taping over your power meter, and just...
Things like that can be useful because actually in some sports science studies that's how they do their time trials is that you're told when you have to complete a certain amount of kilojoules and all you're told is you've completed 25% and then 50% and then 75% and that's all the information you get and maybe that would be a good
Testing method for people who are stuck in a bit of a rut and think they can never raise their threshold higher. Well that's an interesting one because I do something very similar with time trialists who need to work on pacing.
Which is some of them, not all of them, but it's like, we'll pick a distance. I'll be like, go to your favorite 40k TT course near your house and today's, you know, TT day, like do a full dress rehearsal, get your race wheels out, get your race helmet out and do your same warm-up and sit down for, you know, five, eight minutes before you actually get on your bike. Do the same start and, you know, like dress rehearsal day.
Your only feedback should be your distance and how you're feeling. And if you need anything else, make it as much like race day as possible. Some people like to have power, but some people it gets in their heads. And I have definitely more than one client who every time it comes time to test day, no matter what the test is, they're way more nervous than they need to be by a lot. And sometimes that really gets into their head and their legs. It should get into their legs.
Yeah, well, I mean, your brain uses a lot of glucose, doesn't it? So, if you've got to, you know, really overthinking it and really getting nervous, that literally is glucose going to your brain that you could spare for your legs, so. In fact, I don't know if you heard, it's quite a popular podcast, Inigo Sam Milan did, and he, I've never heard anyone say this before, but that actually, part of the reason mental stress can deplete you.
is because not only the liver can supply blood glucose, but you can actually, your muscles can release glycogen that can then be used by your brain if you're particularly stressed. So you can think that you're doing all your carb loading right, whereas actually, which yeah, you could be.
But you can actually deplete muscle glycogen by being stressed mentally? I assume that's through lactate efflux. Because you cannot, like a glycogen molecule itself is way too big to send it to the bloodstream. There's no transporters that would handle anything like that size. But I am assuming it's from, you know, lactate. Because when we are stressed...
The hormonal cascade switches us from rest and digest to fight or flight. And so now not only are you no longer building glycogen when you could be, because if you spend days and weeks stress, like my recent move, I was extremely stressed for like three weeks straight. And by the time I got here and settled in, I was like,
Four or five pounds light compared to what I was before all that stress happened because I lost so much water weight and I wasn't doing anything to really like replenish it. Not that I really even could. I mean, I could have eaten more. I could have drank more and had more salts. But, you know, it's seriously taken me like a week to get past that.
But the stress is very real in that respect, and that definitely has a physiological effect. And I forget exactly what the hormonal cascades are, but I'm assuming that's glycogen related and increased carbohydrate utilization related. But it could also be one of those things where, because one of the things about stress is that
You know, some of the hormones that do the same things there would also release fatty acids. And so we could be burning more fatty acids as well. But I think it's mostly just the fact that we're not building glycogen and potentially we're not in that like Resin Digest, which also includes build and recover kind of phase. But I need to do a lot more research on something like that. So that's just me spitballing. Yeah. No, I'll go back into that because it...
It was, yeah, it was, I'll go back into it. It was, yeah. Yeah, well, because I think, you know, because I, well, because Nugosan Milan is from the Brooks School of Thought on lactate shuttling. Yeah. So, and I have some thoughts on lactate shuttling. I want to ask him directly about it. Maybe I'll ask him to be on the podcast someday.
I feel like I'm not smart enough to have him on the podcast because I'm going to ask him a question and he's going to walk all over me and I'm going to be like, oh, that's interesting. Yeah, you might have an interesting opinion on, we talked about the pros and mostly cons of inside methods, but I suppose other coaches using the idea of that when you, say for like doing under overs, you do your overs at
like maximum lactate shuttling rate which so like when they say that around your yeah your maximum fat oxidation rate you're clearing lactate fastest and does that does that mean it's the best way to train your ability to clear lactate because Inigo San Milan would say that it's all just about having yeah
A stronger aerobic capacity so you can do it more whereas like actually clearing lactate is not something that you need to train as an ability of itself if you understand me um yeah I think um so not something you have to practice deliberately I think it might be something that needs some practice because I and I've I've never looked into this this is just uh
The first thing is I agree with Sam Milan that aerobic base is paramount with that. Because doing a lot of riding, doing a lot of quality intervals, like threshold and sub-threshold intervals, that is going to greatly increase mitochondrial density. And the number one thing that we have to clear lactate is muscle mitochondria in our working muscles.
And not only that, but the working muscles that clear the mitochondria that they themselves make are the same muscles that are at very high exercise intensities, the same muscles that clear a lot of the lactate from the blood too. So a muscle that is effluxing lactate can also be the same influxing lactate and oxidizing.
both pools of from the blood and also the stuff in the cell and so that's also the thing that allows us to oxidize fats is having high mitochondrial density and I think that on some level if we are going to do over-unders or quote-unquote lactate shuttling kind of stuff I am guessing
That it will to some degree increase MCT4 transporters into the mitochondria and possibly on the cell surface to transport more lactate. MCT is standing for monocarboxylate and lactate of course having one carboxyl group. And so that's just in theory. I have not read any papers on it. I don't know. But, you know, it seems like both would be the right way to do it.
Although would you say it's not pretty clear that one is clearly a lot more important than the other? Volume, yeah, volume, endurance training. Like just having the more mitochondria, regardless of what specific training you've done to achieve it, is clearly much more important than training a specific ability to clear lactate with lactate clearance workouts. Yeah, well, because the thing is, like, the real question is, why do we want to clear lactate? Right? Yeah, I mean, that's another thing, because...
It sort of advertises this lactate clearance is the ideal thing to do in the recovery between your intervals. You know, say you're doing... Exactly. Yeah, because then you clear the lactate faster, it's going to make your next... Exactly, this is how it's genuine inside spiel. Because you want to clear lactate as fast as you can so that you're fresher for your...
Next interval. The product doesn't add to fatigue, so if it's there or not, it doesn't matter. No, exactly. In fact, it's a fuel. So why would you want to drive it down as low as you can before you start your next effort? And in fact, even with primers and warm-up, part of the idea of that is to get your lactate level
A certain amount above baseline before you start, so you're not starting with no lactate in your system. Well, that's one of those things that sounds like it's literally false, metaphorically true. Like, having high lactate is irrelevant. We can give you an IV drip of lactate, like, who cares? But what I think that's doing is making you work hard enough.
that you actually start to open local capillary beds. You actually start to increase epinephrine production. You actually start to increase breathing rate. You actually start to, you know, prime your sweat response so you can cool yourself for the hard work you're about to do. You know, there's, and a million other things that I'll, I probably am not remembering or am not aware of at this point. So, so it's like, it's like you can make
Your entire world view based around Lactate, but there's so much else with regards to... So much else going on, yeah. Yeah, that like, I think in some ways if it leads to good performances or leads to improved performances, that's fine, but I mean, that doesn't always make it true. And I think, you know, it's sort of interesting that, you know, with the Lactate stuff is that when we think about...
you know very basic like like how many how many people listening have done like cell bio and you take a bacterium and you you infuse a plasmid in it and then you expose it to a certain like sugar like arabinose or something and then that yields expression of blah blah blah and therefore the bacteria grows under blacklight or glows under blacklight so
It's one of those things where the presence of a certain thing can yield a response because the cell goes, oh, we've got this thing. We might as well use it. We should make some transporters so we can actually utilize whatever. So that might be kind of where the lactate clearance thing comes from. That's also kind of where if you eat more fats...
and reduce your carbohydrates, you're going to be able to burn fats better because it does improve fat transporters, but that's only because you're eating so much. But, you know, with regards to lactate, I think one of the things that a lot of people, you know, maybe don't think about when they think about lactate and all this stuff is that, you know, Semelon, you know, has talked about how Pogacar has lower lactate values at higher power levels than just about anybody else.
And it's almost like, you know, well anybody else is tested I guess. But I think a lot of that comes from just the fact that he's a genetic freak and he's got more mitochondrial density than just about anybody. And so he can use more lactate and fat at higher power values than anybody else. So he can better aerobically utilize all those fuels whereas a lot of other people...
Probably can't, but it really still comes down to, well, that's part of it. And I think the other part of it's just, you know, what's your VO2 max and what's your threshold? And so it's complicated, you know, there's no one thing that's going to lead to better performance. Where were we going with this? I forgot. Yeah, I'm not sure. Yeah.
Oh, you were talking about like inside and lactate clearance and lactate philosophy and stuff like that. Yeah, like why you don't need to do the recoveries between your intervals at your fat max zone. Oh god, that would be terrible. Because one of the things that I saw doing research for the phosphocreatine episode that I think...
We all know kind of experientially, is if you, and actually we know from the critical power W' model, is that if you are doing more work between efforts, you are reducing your recovery rate. Yeah, yeah. So actually my good friends at university was doing his PhD, which I think he's still just finishing this summer, is about reconstitution of W' and so I know from him that
There's still so much we don't understand about that and like what can help speed that up and you know both with like acutely and with different training interventions because clearly some people like like because you can have models now can't you to to model like like on cycling analytics I know that I use you can have you know like a graph of what your W prime balance is but of course it's it's kind of yes
It's not greatly accurate because everyone will reconstitute W-prime at different speeds. And there's so much not understood about what affects that and what type of training, if at all, can make it, can improve that. Well, you know, experientially, I find that my athletes who just ride more, just blanket, just ride more.
have way better repeatability. And they have way better depth, even if all the other metrics stay the same. Or even if some metrics drop. I have a couple clients who, before they were working with me, were doing a lot of polarized stuff. And so in WKO5, the MFTP was X. And with me, I'm a little more focused on
You know endurance and repeatability and things that I am sure are going to get them better race results and so not only do they actually have better race results in some instances their FTP is a little higher but in some instances their FTP is actually like you know five or ten watts lower and as much as they don't like that
they have better race results and they have better fatigue resistance and better repeatability because we're focused on you know we're not focused on that one number we're focused on kind of a holistic view of performance and while I always say you know the threshold is better like you know five or ten watts
You know, I think that's a good trade-off for better performances and better endurance. Well, if you just tuck your elbows in a bit more and kind of get your head down, that makes, in most flat races that you get in the UK, that's going to make more difference anyway, or get some arrow socks. Yeah, new skin suit. Yeah. Yeah. I was actually going to say something proper then, I can't remember now. Oh, yeah, I was saying, so, yeah, generally,
More volume being more aerobically fit is going to be the main thing that improves your repeatability. But equally, I'd say quite often still if you give an athlete, say you're trying to improve their repeated sprint ability, that will still improve after a block of doing repeated sprints. Oh, yeah. I mean, because there it's like, you know, like I said before, you kind of have to do everything. Yeah. And so.
Because I remember the first year I actually coached myself, I did, I had done a ton of just volume, and part of it was just meditative, I was, you know, thinking about my life and everything, and I take this time off of work, and I also, when it came time to, well, I was getting closer to racing, and I was, whether I thought I was doing it on purpose or not, I don't think I was, I was doing a lot of
I was basically doing polarized training. And I had done very little threshold work. One day I kind of woke up and I was like, oh my God, I've got a race coming up in like six weeks. I should probably start getting ready for race efforts. And so I started doing just hill reps and repeated sprints and that kind of stuff, anaerobic capacity type things. And I got to the race and I was on great, great, great form.
I think I did like two crits in a row and like an elimination race in the crit course. And I got better as I went on and everybody else got more tired. But I was definitely missing some threshold work and I was like, oh man, I got to work on this before the road races I've got coming up in the summer. And so I think if I hadn't done those hard efforts, because it was like, you know, stuff like one minute all out, five minute rest.
One minute all out, five minute rest, like ten times. Absolute death for somebody like me. I was also doing like five second sprint, 25 second rest, 10 second sprint, 50 second rest. I did not, I probably did like five middle intensity efforts between like January and March in the first race. So, you know, and so, you know, race specific efforts plus volume helped a lot. And I think if I had done threshold,
And volume, it would have helped some, but not as much, because that's just what the criterion was. But I knew for road races later, I was going to have to really work the threshold stuff, because otherwise I was going to get shot out the back after, you know, whatever. But it's sort of like you need everything, like I said. Yeah. So... Yeah, you need everything on the physiological side. You need to be...
Like, yeah, it's like also powerful aerodynamic and potentially if it goes uphill, you have to not be too heavy. So it's like, yeah, there's just, you have to be everything really to be fast. Yeah, yeah. So even with repeatability, there's not like one answer. You know, you have to train. No, oh yeah, that's where we were at. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, the same ability, even something as niche as that can be as so many like
different ways you can achieve it and equally to get it super up that is optimized as it can be you can't just attack it from one angle it's like you've got a yeah add each layer of the cake if you like yeah definitely yeah so yeah is there anything else in your mind before we before we wrap this up
I think, I mean, maybe you could edit this out, but I just thought at one point that might have been worth making more back towards when you're talking about critical power, is that one, yeah, in that lecture where we're talking about the zones, it was mentioned that you potentially could have another zone which was above.
like MAP and MAP is something that sits even less well with me than critical power does because it is just complete all it means is something above critical power that's all I could say that MAP is it means it's something above that because literally you can be at VO2max and doing absolutely anything as long as it's above critical power and you could probably even be even at VO2max
and below critical power if you've gone enough above it and not had enough recovery. So, yeah, I just thought that was another example of how you can be in. I think that gets to exercise intensity domains because one of the definitions of going from the heavy to severe domain is that when you're in the severe domain, you have to hit VO2 max.
at some point. So if you've got a 60-minute TTE, let's just call it FTP just to make it simple, and if you go up 10 watts, you're now in the threshold, but if you don't hit VO2 max, suddenly you're not in the severe zone, even though metabolically, I would argue that you are past that transition point, because I think critical power is looking for that transition point too.
I think that we cannot really use it like that for everybody just as a blanket statement, especially if we do like a three minute, 15 minute kind of two tests critical power calculation. Although I was just thinking back to that again, the one other way you could kind of have rigorously define
a zone above like a zone above that zone three in the three zone model would be that a power output that is so high that if you are that you can't keep it up for long enough to reach VO2max I think that's called the extreme domain if I'm not mistaken and which would be like extreme domain extreme domain yeah but then how to actually test for that because I can imagine depending on the type of athlete
that could be in some people like it's something they can sustain for one minute whereas it could be something that or 30 seconds even a pure pure sprinter whereas it could be like three minute power and then in someone who's got a smaller anaerobic capacity and I guess then you could then call MAP the top end of that zone but then that's not what MAP is defined as so I
I just think the only real use of MAP would be if you keep it, if you're doing a VO2 max test measured properly in a lab with measuring gas exchange, it can have internal validity if everything is kept constant around it, which would have to be your cadence, your bike position, the test protocol.
And then you could even have an efficiency of the ratio of your power to your oxygen cost at your VO2max. But if everything isn't kept perfectly consistent, then it's meaningless because if you change your cadence when you're at VO2max or you change your bike position or you change your test protocol, then that's all going to completely change what your MAP is and even your efficiency at VO2max.
Or if you change exercise mode and muscle recruitment, like if you suddenly go from cycling to assault biking, which I think is the one where you push the arms to, now you have muscle mass, so that's going to effectively increase your beta to max, even though your legs are consuming probably the same, if not a little bit less. So the question is, is it peripheral, is it central? But also, with a ramp test,
You know, if we keep it in the right range to find, you know, VO2 max, you know, this comes from Hill in like, what, the 1920s, 27 or something like that, where the definition is that you have to have a sufficiently large amount of muscle mass used, and you also have to find a plateau in the O2 uptake for an increase in work. But the question is, does that O2 uptake yield what?
Is effectively the same power for everybody? And the answer is no, because now we're over thresholds and now we have anaerobic capacity to contend with as well. And so we cannot say that maximum aerobic power, you know, even from a ramp test is the same for everybody. It's not even going to be the same for the person because there's an Adami study that I've referenced like eight times in the podcast so far. It's like that shows that depending on that you can actually use the
Critical Power Model in W Prime to figure out exactly how long somebody's going to last at a RAM test and actually predict their finishing value. Yeah, basic aerobic capacity, yeah. Yeah, and so there's, to me at least, there's really no such thing as VO2max power.
I think this is one of the disservices that strict definitions give us with all this kind of stuff because we all kind of know what we're looking for.
But it needs to be individualized to such a degree that no matter what definition we have, it's like we can make it pretty broad and it's probably not going to capture everybody. Yeah, yeah, I mean, yeah, that's even true with like, yeah, LT1, isn't it? That it's probably not going to get the right.
The definition for an elite athlete is not going to be appropriate for someone who's untrained. There almost isn't anything true as a true steady state. Even below LT1, you'll eventually start decoupling and eventually start fatiguing and producing lactate.
Something that was below your LT1 eight hours ago. Well, you know, what's funny is I have a young athlete in, let's see, he's in Belgium. And he, for a long time, he was actually riding over LT1 on his endurance rides. And we're talking like five, six, seven hour rides. No decoupling. And it wasn't much. It was just a little bit.
But then one day he was like, oh my god, I rode a little easier today and I think I figured it out. I was riding a little too hard. And suddenly he's actually recovering a lot faster now from his efforts than we're seeing improvements. Where previously I was like, what is going on here? And so we were trying a lot of different things, trying to figure it out. And that was it. Because he wasn't decoupling at all. And this is actually something that I see a lot in high performance athletes.
You know, if we look for decoupling in somebody like me, we're going to be able to find it pretty easily at just about any exercise intensity. Somebody like him, it's going to be really difficult to see. So again, like, and also I think it's funny, like my level of untrainedness is really interesting because I was doing another investigation of myself for LT1 and I actually found that my RPE and HRV, not the HRV everybody's thinking of, it wasn't the
What is it? It wasn't the 0.5 or 0.75 or whichever one it is. My HRV picked it up with my RPE, my LT1, better than lactate did. Lactate testing actually put me at like 15, 20 watts higher than I actually felt it.
So I thought that was really, really fascinating. So again, even with lactate testing, somebody as untrained as me can pretty much violate the expectations. And I was still below 2 millimole, which is usually, I think, the population average for untrained people at LT1. Yeah. And then even when you know, if you think you know what your LT1 is, you still often find that
Riding 50 watts below it and to do the same kilojoules is a lot less depleting than riding 20 watts below it so and then you almost start to think well why is knowing my LT1 so much more useful than figuring out what just what type of intensity leaves me the most fresh and still gives me adaptations yeah and so yeah well I think it's I think that's part of
I think that's part of the demand, because if we find a threshold, people want to ride at that threshold. And one of the things that I find, and my athletes find as well, who are tracking this kind of stuff, is that LT1 actually changes with fatigue. It effectively drops as you get retired, and as you freshen up, it goes up. And so I think, and my athletes who ride the most, they'll like report LT1 to me just by RPE. They're like, oh, I felt it was here today.
One of my guys was like, I feel like it's 300 watts now. And I'm like, that's really good. But if you look at his endurance rides, he's riding six, seven, eight hours. It's not even close to 300 watts average for the whole thing because it's one of those things. He knows how to pace it. He knows how to get all the adaptations without so much fatigue. And it's one of those things where I think having that experience versus having expectation.
Based on, you know, whatever scientific literature I think is super, super critical to having a lot of success. And I think that's part of where experience in training and racing is just as valuable as having a good scientific education. Yeah, I mean, I feel like having the education can help and possibly shortcut and or inform.
Inform that and I feel like now I've got this education that it really does help inform both my own training process and my coaching but like you said that in isolation like is nowhere near sufficient like most of the other people on my course I would say that would be no without cycling experience would be no better able to be a coach than
Some people who've not had any education in sports science. So, like you say, I think having both is the ideal scenario. Yeah, I mean, I agree, but that's because I'm biased. More confirmation bias. And, you know, it's funny because my education is in, my degree is biology, and I had a focus in biochem and evolution. And so...
And so my perspective on all this stuff is very different from yours. But I think we get to the same point. And I think that's really, really cool is that, you know, it's kind of convergent evolution, if you will. Yeah, yeah. Oh, I have one more question for you. I'm sure, because it looks like you're in a cafe. I'm in a restaurant, cafe, hotel.
Yeah, so I don't want you to overstate your welcome there, but I'm sure our listeners are getting a little tired. But I think the last thing is one of the two things that I was going to ask you earlier, and it's, you know, do you have an opinion or a take or any thoughts at all on people who overemphasize what has been scientifically validated?
versus what we have experientially in the real world as coaches. Yes, definitely. And I could, yeah, sort of speak and mention certain people, yeah, coaches, I know that. No names, no names. Yeah, who would only do something if they see it scientifically proven. But I'd say, like,
If you wait for something to be properly scientifically proven, you're waiting for a meta-analysis to be published, really, of many years of research amalgamated. But if you're waiting that long, that's 20 years, and then you're behind the curve, and your career's already over. So if something works, you have to get on it and start doing it quickly.
A good example my supervisor gave was when creatine came out as a supplement and some athletes were using it at the Olympics and I'm probably getting this fact really wrong but in the 100 metre final one year seven out of the eight athletes were on creatine and the one who wasn't was last.
You had to be on it then to be able to compete. But if you'd have waited till creatine was a well-evidenced supplement that it is now, with a meta-analysis done about it, you'd be 50 and you'd be retired and you can't be an elite sprinter anymore. So I think that's kind of like, yeah, you can't wait till something's...
Regorously, scientifically validated because it's too late. Yeah, I'm actually doing an experiment on creating myself right now, which is I'm not supplementing with it, despite the fact that I am indeed a training sprinter. And now that I actually live close to the track, I'm actually looking forward to actually competing like regularly for the first time since like 2015 or something. Oh, fantastic. Yeah, managing my injuries well.
Better than me.
You know because acceleration is a huge thing in track spreading so I want to see if that extra weight to accelerate is outweighed so to speak by by being able to push the pedals a little longer and a little harder because the answer is I don't know yeah I expect it will be but I want to do this experiment for myself just because I don't know I just it should it should be fine but it's one of those things where you need to gut check yourself you know
Yeah, it would be interesting to see how I get on with that, because it's not been well investigated, really, in different events, whether the trade-off between the extra power and increase in weight, whether it's worth it. Yeah, well, I would expect in running a 100-meter dash, it would easily be worth it, because you spend less time accelerating and more time at top speed than, you know.
or on the track. If we're going to do a standing start for 250 meters or 125 or if we're going to do a flying 200, I expect those are going to have slightly different outcomes. It's just going to be end of one, but I'll know something and I'll probably know at the end that I just didn't want to supplement creatine because I didn't want that number on the scale to be above 200 anymore. Yeah.
Alright, so we should wrap this up. I actually have to do a couple things, but where can people find you? Where can people get in touch with Marinus Petersen and Kilowatt Coaching? Okay, so I've got a personal Instagram account for Marinus Petersen and my coaching page, which is
I'm just starting to build up some posts and there is a kilowatt coaching just again on Instagram so I'm trying to keep the simple on on the one platform at the moment in 2020 I did make some YouTube videos which are sort of some of them perhaps so bad you could almost find them funny I haven't made any since or recently but
I'm hoping now that I'm fully focusing on my racing and my coaching that I'm going to try and make some proper content and take that all a bit more seriously alongside the social media. But as of now I'm coaching, I'm taking on new people and I'll be interested to hear from you. And I think for a future YouTube video an idea would be to
Open it with you trying to do, was it a kickflip on the scooter? I wasn't even trying to do anything, this is how tragic it was, I was just trying to go down a ramp without falling off. Being forced to go down a ramp and ended up falling off. And breaking your ankle and then it should cut to you on a podium.
Yeah, nothing in between. Nothing in between. How it started, how it's going. That would be good. Well, I wish you a speedy recovery and I am really excited to actually start working with you once you are out of your ass and can ride a bike again. Hopefully four weeks time. Awesome. Can't wait.
Cheers, Cody Oh, so people will get in touch with you, just DM on Instagram would be Oh, so, yeah, if you just DM me on Instagram Yeah, that's the best way I should be able to get back to you all pretty quick at the moment Alright, fantastic, thanks for coming on Brilliant, thanks so much, enjoyed that, yeah
Alright, so that was my interview with Marinus Petersen and obviously I think people are going to want to follow him on Instagram at Kilowatt Coaching and also Marinus Petersen so reach out to him if you want to get in touch with him and of course reach out to us if you want to get in touch with us empiricalcycling on Instagram and of course empiricalcycling at gmail.com for just the old fashioned email so
if you have any coaching consultation inquiries for us please let us know we are always taking on new athletes of course and if you want to consult we will you know our time is your time please reach out for one of those those are actually a lot of fun for us and a lot of fun for a lot of people and all the feedback I've gotten so far from people who've had a consult with us has been incredibly positive so thank you all for all of those over the years of course
and now of course the usual stuff if you want to donate to the show empiricalcyclingpodcast.com slash donate we have show notes up on the website under the podcast episodes and of course I have tagged Marinus on Instagram so if you want to go follow him that's an easy way to do it and of course we have weekend AMAs up on the Instagram and with that we'll be back next week hopefully with a Wattstock if I can finish it in time once Kyle is actually back from his conference so thanks everybody for listening as always and we'll see you next time.